Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Sarah Dierne. She's a PhD
candidate in interpretation studies at the Department of Humanities
at the University of Catania in Italy, where she
collaborates with the chair of theoretical philosophy. And today
we're going to talk about her book slash monograph
Eil Nachereque Nochivolleva Storia Ehioria de Latinatalismo. Uh, uh,
THAT'S the title in Italian. I mean, my translation
is it's the Birth we didn't want History and
theory of antenatalism. So, Sarah, welcome to the show.
It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you, thank you, Har Ricardo. Hi to all
the listeners and thank you for the invitation.
Of course, I mean, as I said, off record,
uh, yours is one of my favorite books of
2025, so I'm really happy to finally have you
on the show. So let me start by asking
you then, before we get into the actual content
of your book slash monograph, what is Anti-atalism for
you because I've noticed that probably different theorists, different
philosophers, different people that are that identify as antenatalists
have perhaps uh somewhat different conception of it. So
what is your conception of antenatalism?
I would say that anti-nativism for me is a
kind of philosophical perspective where we try to understand
what life is and we try to explain the
reason for which. Not to be born, um, it
should be uh preferable and for me it's a
perspective that includes all living beings and I mean
all sentient beings, but uh in my work I
focus only on the human beings. I mean right
now and uh yeah, this is a philosophical position
I suppose, so it's the more uh the more
general reply I can tell you.
Yeah, I mean, so at least at this point
you don't try to extend it to all sentient
beings, is that it,
right? Yes, because also in the type of research
I'm doing right now, I'm trying to focus on
the role of the consciousness, so. Yeah, this is
the reason for which human beings are the focus
also because it's more difficult, I suppose, to to
find a way to pursue antiatist behavior in the
in the sentient beings, but in the non-human beings.
Sure, so what got you interested in anti-atalism? I
mean, even as a philosopher, you could have gone
through many different paths. I mean, philosophy basically includes
everything out there in terms of intellectual pursuits, so
why anti-natalism?
Uh, THIS is a good question. I like it.
I I have to I have to say that
I always got interested with the suffering of human
beings and when I started my career at the
university, I started by discussing. With that condition, that
particular situation where we have people who suffer from
some disease, so the case of euthanasia, assisted suicide,
because in my opinion they were they were that
particular cases in which we We have to explain
why not not being in the world, it would
be preferable to be in the world than to
be in the world in that situation. Then after
the bachelor's degree, I got to know the atheism
and I have to confess that it was quite
uh uh randomly my because I read a paper
of the professor who now is my supervisor and
uh I read this paper on anti-nativism um in
the same year, it was the 2020. I read
the Italian translation of the Human Predicament uh by
David Bennetter and uh yeah, I, I found uh
in the 1880ism a way to. Discuss about the
relation or the the the the the dialectics between
the possibility of not being into the world and
being to the world in a user perspective because
it does not comprehend only that particular situation where
we have the disease and some factual events, but
we speak about suffering that. Um, THAT all of
us, um, er, possess or, uh, a reason for
suffer, so I mean it's a, a kind of
more comprehensive philosophical position, I suppose.
I mean, uh, just out of curiosity, is your
supervisor Professor Buso? Yes. Oh, OK. I, I also
like his work very much, so Giovanni Buso, yeah,
yeah, yeah, yeah, I really like his work. So,
uh, let, let me now get into the book
slash monograph itself. So you start with the question
of why does something exist rather than. Nothing since
nothingness is simpler than being. I mean, why do
you think it is important to start with metaphysics
when talking about antenatal?
Well, it's the perspective that I had on my
book and then that I'm trying to deepen now.
And as for the Leibniz question, I think that
it is quite interesting because if we change this
question and try to consider when we speak about
nothing and being of the if we try to
consider this question related to the human life, we
can it becomes quite. Interesting because we have to
understand why if nothing and so not to be
into life it's easier, it's simple, it's less painful
we are in the world why we continue existing
and as for the metaphysical perspective, I think that.
I mean, in my opinion, it's a kind of
perspective that comes before the ethical issue because first
of all we must understand what does it mean
to be human, what does it life, and what
is suffering, and as for my perspective, what is
interesting of the metaphysical position is that we try
to compare our Being into the world with the
presence with the existence of the other beings and
I mean it turns out that we have the
existence is quite the same because also a rock,
also the chair where I am now, it's going
to be deleted by the time, but for men
this is the reason of suffering for all sentient
beings, but for humans this is the reason of
suffering, this is the reason of pain and the
The normal end of everything for man is death,
and it's one of the main reasons of of
suffering of troubles for human beings. So this is
my perspective, and I think that the metaphysical position
gives us the possibility to to speak about the
meaning of birth, the meaning of being born, and
on which basement we can build up all the
ethical issue which derives from this knowledge.
Uh, IT'S very interesting. I mean, it, it sort
of reminds me of, uh, Kent and Schopenhauer where
they start their philosophy with metaphysics and then go
to epistemology, and only then they get into ethics.
I mean, it's like we have to have an
understanding of the world we're living in and what
we can know about it and only then we
can get into ethics. That, that's interesting. I, I
mean, do you have that same sort of perspective?
Yeah, I think that's my perspective is uh uh.
Yeah, it goes in this direction because I think
that like a kind of Socratics way, you know,
if we know what is good and what is
wrong, then we can be able to to adapt
our behavior to that knowledge, and I think that.
Anti-natalism, it's quite the same also because we have
anti-natalism, it's not so common. It's a radical issue
and first of all, I think it's important to
to make this argument more clear. We can try
to understand what are the reasons, and then we
can discuss about the result, the behavior, the ethical
issue like all. Uh, PROCREATION and so on.
OK, so another important question here has to do
with how we deal with living beings. So what
separates the inorganic from the organic? How do you
address that question?
For me, there is no difference between the organic
and inorganic. I mean, on the one hand, of
course they are different. There are two different ways
in which the matter. Um, GOES to individuate and
the individuation in a Schopenhauer's sense, but I think
that it's only a question of difference. I mean,
it's um. There is no privilege. There is no
evolution, and I think that the similarity there are
many similarities. For example, the example of the desk,
the desk starts and it's an existent being that
starts and go to finish and the same we
can say for life. It starts and it finishes.
Like all the existent beings, but for life this
is the reason of pain and this is the
reason I mean we call the beginning moment therefore
we call the ending moment death. So and we
leave all this period between the beginning and the
end as a reason of pain, but apart from
that, I think that they represent only two different
ways of the matter.
Mhm, YES, um, tell us about the ontocentric paradigm
you bring into your book and how does it
differ from an anthropocentric paradigm.
Yeah, it's the, I call the ontocientic paradigm, the
paradigm that in my perspective can be interesting to
pursue because we have a kind of relation between
the being of the living being and the huge
being, so we can discuss about life. Considering life
from the inner side as in the more maybe
anthropocentric position, but we try to understand life from
a perspective in which we understand what is life
and to confront it, to compare it with, as
I said, the other existing beings so we can.
Yeah, we can see life in in this um
I mean within the nature and to discover that
it's not so easy as the presence of the
other beings and uh all the uh question, all
the concept that I try to uh to discuss
so far.
Mhm. Uh, TELL us about the event of being
born. I mean, and I guess that this is
also relevant to other kinds of ethical questions like
questions related to reproductive ethics and abortion and so
on. I mean, we, we maybe, maybe we'll get
into that later, but what is it to be
born and how should this question be approached?
Well, uh, I think that uh uh being born
we can have different replies and it depends on
uh how we we we want to deal with
this um with this question with this topic because
for example if we consider the position of some
philosopher, I'm thinking to uh Hanna Har and uh
for. This woman being born, it means it's open
to the future, so maybe it represents a new
beginning if we consider the biological perspective, it is
only the the born of a new self that
then is going to evolve and so on. I
think that so there is no one reply. I
mean it depends on the. Perspective, I can say
that for me being born is the coming into
the world of a new living being and if
we want to consider the sentence and human being,
it's the coming into the world of humans that
That goes to suffer, that goes to start and
to start his life and that goes to end
it and who leave this period with pain, anger,
suffering, and Yeah, but I think that from my
metaphysical perspective before any ethical issue like reproduction, procreation,
and yeah, it's the simple coming into the world
of a new beings.
Let me ask you this, do you think we
are really predisposed biologically to wanting children or simply
predisposed to wanting sex? Because for me it's not,
uh, clear at all, and I'm not convinced that
we really want to have children biologically. I mean
that we have to learn culturally from other people
first we have to associate having sex with reproduction
and children uh and then we we also have
to learn that uh I mean perhaps we should
want to reproduce instead of just wanting to have
sex. So what is your perspective on that?
Uh, MAYBE I changed the verb. I will say
that we are not predisposed to want children or
want sex, but we are, uh, we are predisposed
to have sex and children. I mean, for me
it's. I think that it's natural our bodies are
predisposed to have children. It's a biological way of
living things and we are predisposed to have sex
and also this is a biological way in which
our body is structured, so I think that there
is more biology than we can imagine, but I
would say also that the difference is that Men
as the human beings as the possibility to understand
this biological way and to stop it, to decide
to to control, to understand and to ask why
we have to, we need to have children, why
we can distinguish between sex and having children. I
mean, for example, for the animal, but it's my
opinion. I'm not I'm not so sure. I think
that there is no there is not this difference
between sex and er er reproduction. So I mean
maybe we are able to understand the difference because
of the, um, you know, the, the, the dialectics
between nature and culture. So maybe because of the
culture we are able to understand, but first of
all I think that it's all uh biological structure
of our body.
Yeah, that, that's, that's interesting. I, I mean, I
guess that, of course, uh many times we hear
people justifying uh their reproduction, them having children, uh,
by way of it being just a biological predisposition
or even uh some, some sort of biological imperative,
but I mean, uh, I think that's a, a
really weak argument from a ethical perspective because if
we're going to justify reproduction on the basis of
having sort of a reproductive drive then there are
many things we are biologically predisposed to even things
that are violent uh that uh we shouldn't justify
just on the basis of us having those uh
predispositions or those drives right.
Yeah, I mean, I agree with you. I think
that to say that we are biologically predisposed does
not mean that we must do it. We have
this will to live which we cannot control sometimes
I. Also noticed that this is one of the
more common reply that people use to criticize the
internet list, but I mean it's it's also the
most easy maybe we now we have the knowledge,
we have the possibility to understand what is reproduction,
what does it mean, and also I. I mean
the biological, the biological structure does not exclude that
we are, we are, we receive the influence from
the society or the normal evolution of life, you
know, we are like, OK, we grew up, we
got married, we got to have a family, and
There are some kind of cultural influences that I
think influences our decision.
Yes, sure. Uh, DOES antenatalism have anything to say
about abortion?
Yes, I would say that antenatalism deal and may
deal with the abortion, but because of course we
are considering a practice to stop procreation, to stop,
but when there is something that is not a
new living being in like an existing being, but
Yeah, I think that it may deal with this
topic, but I think it's a second step because
first of all we have to consider what does
it mean to the problem of life. Then we
can consider all these ethical other issues that we
can we can adopt, we can take to to
find a solution.
Mhm. And what would you say are the harms
brought about by life? I mean, just by being
born, by living, what harms are we exposed to?
Uh, WELL, uh, I mean, uh, yeah, this is
a good question, but because, um, uh, I, I
think that, uh, uh, we cannot, uh, uh. Find
any objective suffering. I think that the simple fact
that we are alive, it means that we will
suffer for something, and the reasons for suffering are
different. Maybe I would say that. If I consider
some um some um Features that are intrinsic in
every life we can speak about the role of
the consciousness and I'm trying to focus on the
role of the time and to discover or try
to understand in which way. The meaning of time
can be a reason of pain for human beings
because we are aware of time, so the time
will pass and it means the loss of something.
So maybe I would say that this can be
too. Two features of suffering for human beings and
uh yeah, but for human beings, only for human
beings I mean I would say, and because there
are some structural structural structural features that that that
comes with every new life.
Mhm. Yeah, do, do you think that, I mean,
when it comes to the harms and the good
as the positive aspects of life, do you think
that we can evaluate that objectively since different people
have. Different perspectives on what happens to them and
deal with what happens to them, good and bad
in different ways. I mean, do you think we
can evaluate that objectively or only subjectively.
Ah I would say only subjective, but because I
mean each person has his own reason to suffer
and the stuff, the situation that make me sad
are not the same that make you sad, but
I cannot evaluate and compare my suffering with your
suffering. I think that we can only, we can
only we agree only on the fact that we
suffer for something. Yeah,
yeah,
in a formal way, maybe,
mhm, and uh I mean how does the reality
of death frame life itself? I mean the fact
that we are inevitably going to die, what sort
of implications does that have for our lives as
human beings?
I think that we must distinguish between death as
the act of dying and death as something which
is which comes with life, and I try to
do this to make this distinction because in my,
if we speak about death as the last moment,
the act of dying. I mean, I quite agree
with Epicurus. I'm not sure that it's so painful
because we are going to, to, I mean we
are alive, so we cannot, we still are here
and we don't experience death, but I would say
that. It's the act of passing away, but there
is another way to to understand maybe death, which
is more painful for beings, for human beings, and
is the type of death that's like a process,
so that. Kind of death that comes with life.
So from from the first moment we are into
the world, we start to live, we start to
die because each moment we lost something that does
not come back anymore. So I think that in
this way it's it frames in some way the
life because it's something that that comes with our.
Uh, WITH, with our life, each time we, we
experience the loss of something.
Mhm. So this is something that you've already touched
on a little bit earlier, but is intelligence or
some of our other psychological traits something that makes
humans special in comparison to other animals, particularly when
it comes to how we approach existential questions.
Uh, I can, uh, I can, uh, give you
to reply. The first one is, is not mine.
Uh, IT'S um. There is one of the moralists
Saul Leopardin in which he said that human beings
are perfect but perfect in imperfection, and I would
say that if we consider the intelligence as a
kind of privilege of human beings, we can say
that this privilege is a privilege in imperfection because
of the suffering that intelligence as in the sense
of being aware it's. It involves for for human
beings in this regard, I'm quite, I quite agree
with Peter Bessel's position, but on the other hand,
I would say that. There is no privilege because
intelligence, it's the way in which human beings adapt,
adapt themselves, adapt themselves into the world like the
animal has its own way to adapt and to
survive. I think that intelligence is only the way
in which human beings can survive into the world.
So I mean it's a kind of evolution maybe,
but uh I think that there is no privilege
for uh for it.
Mhm. Why do you think in your understanding, why
is it that anti-natalism tends to get rejected by
most people?
For many reasons, uh, I mean, um, it's time
that some people reject some of my perspective when
we are also in a conversation. First of all,
I always think that I have to consider that
the people who reply to me is the people
who, who is alive and so he considered the
at least. Result and solution and the meaning of
anti-nalism from the perspective of A living being who
exists and who wants wants to continue to exist.
So I think that uh this is one of
the one of the features that we can we
must maybe not we can, we must take into
account when we we we speak, we try to
understand the reason of the uh this um rejection.
At the same time, I would say that it's
not only a question, it's not only a problem
of the acceptance, but I mean maybe it's it's
also a problem of understanding. I'm not so sure
that 18 is so easy to understand for people
and because they they have their own perception of
life, their evaluation of life, so I'm not so
sure that such a huge and radical perspective can
be. Yeah, if they can understand, I mean when
I say that, but it is a philanthropic position
for because it concerns with the suffering of human
beings, most of them seem quite shocked. I mean,
we are speaking about the preference of not being
born and you see that it's philanthropic, but yes.
Yeah, I, I mean, I guess that there's many
things here, many complications. First of all, it's like
going against uh some of our biological impulses, right?
Because I mean, people think that it's, it's just
normal, it's just to be expected to have children
to reproduce, and then we also live in cultures.
I mean, I don't think there's any culture out
there that is anti-atalist. I mean, all. Cultures are
pro-natalist because otherwise they wouldn't even be around. I
mean, an anti-natalist culture seem over time people who
were part of that culture would simply go extinct
and then I mean I guess it would be
the end of an anti-natalist culture, but, uh, and,
and then there's also the fact that we are
already living, we, we already exist, we already have
an investment. Uh, IN this life and so I
mean it's trying to ask people if it would
have been better for them to never have been
born, it's it at least for most people it
sounds similar to asking them if you, if it
would be better for them to be dead, right?
I mean, because they associate the, uh, the first
sort of non-existence with. The second sort that comes
after they've already existed,
right? Yeah, yeah, I totally agree and also because
I think that most of us maybe fortunately I
would say we were able to build our life
in a way where we can. Balance the suffering
with the pleasure or the our project, so maybe
um and also I think that the presence of
project of aim of meaning helps helps us to
to go in a direction so that move that
move us on so we can continue living and
we have a. AN aim we want to pursue
that meaning, that result, and then go and go,
and this is the way in which the life
flow and go until it ends.
OK, so as antenatalists we many times use arguments
based on suffering, right, that it's inevitable that when
a new being, a new human being is brought
into existence, he or She will suffer inevitably. I
mean, in different ways, different people suffer in different
ways, but, uh, suffering is inevitable. But, but, but
that kind of argument for most people or many
people at least is not uh convincing enough because
they, they also suffer. They know that they suffer,
but they can give meaning to their own suffering
and they don't think that is a good enough.
Argument to uh prevent them from reproducing because they
think that new people through their meaning systems, I
don't know, it can be through religion, it can
be through some sort of um secularist um uh
uh uh some sort of secularist belief system they
can uh give meaning to their suffering,
right. OK, OK, now it's clear, yeah, yes, but
also in this case I would reply that we
cannot, I mean, OK, for us maybe we can,
I will reply to these people, maybe for us
it's OK, we can uh we can consider suffering
something bad but not so bad that we should
prevent from to bring other people into the world.
It's OK, but we cannot decide for the other
people because for us suffering is not so painful,
it's not so harmful, and we can balance it
with the rest of our life, but we are
not sure that it will be the same for
the other people. But because, of course we don't
know the life they are going to live, and
we are. I mean we are not them. Maybe
the as I said before, we, I can suffer
for something that for you is not reason of
suffering, and we cannot know what the way they
they deal with suffering. I think that it's quite
selfish to think, yeah, for me, suffering is not
strong enough. We can we can bring someone else
into the world and we will be present and.
We will be there for helping him, OK, all
good, all nice, but we cannot be sure that
for the people who who is into the world,
it's OK and uh.
Yeah, I, I mean, I mean, I actually think
that the argument based on risk that there's a
risk that the, the person you're going to bring
into the world will not like their life, will
suffer beyond anything that they can give any meaning
to. I mean, because there's that risk you shouldn't
reproduce, right? I mean, for me at least that's
one of the strongest anti-Nalist arguments.
Yeah, also for me it's one of the strongest
arguments and uh I mean it's, I think that
it's also uh one of the more um uh
it's one of the arguments that uh um make
all the people agree because uh for example other
arguments uh I don't know, I'm thinking about the
asymmetry argument is quite strong, but many people criticize
it for many reasons and uh with the risk
argument. I think that more and more people should
be agreeing with this one because we are not
speaking about we are not evaluating life saying it's
bad, it's not bad, it's preferable not to be
born. We are speaking about risks, so it's something
that it's clear because also the life of the
already living being, it's it's exposed to the risk
and we must consider that. Uh, WE cannot prevent
from the risk of life because we don't know
which kind of risk we are going to be
exposed.
Yes, so let's talk a little bit about history
here because you also talk about the history of
antenatalism in your book slash monograph. So do we
know how old antenatalism is?
I think that 188 is quite old and I'm
not able to find a starting point, but sometimes
I usually reply to this question. Saying that maybe
with the beginning of the life and of the
aware life we start to have some some feeling
about the arm of life itself because. There are
many passages. One of that is Leopardi. The first
of the moralists is the history of the human
being, and he spoke about this population who celebrated
the moment in which a person dies and the
people. Cried when there was a new living being,
a new living born being, and the same with
Zap because Zafe, The Last Messiah, is a kind
of Genesis tale but with a different with a
different meaning. So I think that these are, these
are different ways to say that. Maybe the the
awareness, the knowledge of the life and of the
suffering of life and of the truth that it
would have been better not to be born, it
starts with the. Yeah, with the presence of man,
I also consider the the ileus reply to Midas,
and this myth, it's a popular myth. I mean
it's it's a kind of story which is not
which is present in the population, in the first
population, the first Greek population, so it means that
the the fact of life was quite clear since
the beginning.
Mhm. Uh, HAVE there been, or would you say
that there have been different forms of anti-atalism across
history?
Yes, of course, and yeah, of course, also because
of the time and it depends on the distinction
then because There are some distinctions between the so
known pro-2naalism and the contemporary one which with which
I disagree. For example, the Lachmanova distinction between the
passive and the active way. It's something that I,
I disagree because I think that it's a different
paradigm. We cannot compare, and I think that the
distinction of Morioca. It's quite it's quite good. I
mean, I agree with this distinction because it's useful
and it helps me to um he helped me
to find the distinction between the metaphysical and the
ethical perspective because Morioka distinguished between the so known
birth negation and the procreation negation. And that is
a way, in my opinion, to say that we
have a kind of metaphysical perspective on antenatalism where
we try to understand the meaning of birth, and
this is the key concept of the Greek and
all the first manifestation where we were, we were
able to understand the difficulty of life, but we
do we do nothing to solve it. And on
the other side, this unknown procreation negation, which represents,
in my opinion, a kind of normative way we
should do something in order to stop the the
birth of a new living being.
Mhm. And what is it that in the book
you call proto anti-atalism? I mean, what does that
mean and what does it apply to in the
history of anti-atalism?
Yeah, I took this proto antina from the Lachmanova,
so it's not my my words, but I like
it also because I mean it's a way to
distinguish from the contemporary one. And if I consider
the Morioca distinction, and I will say that proto
antiatism, so the proto form are all the. The
proto the anti-natalist perspective that comes before Benatar, so
before the contemporary debate on anti-natist. Where we, the
discussion was but yeah, but the discussion was kind
of uh uh in my opinion, er uh it's
a kind of metaphysical discussion on the problem because
we speak about only by about birth. We don't
consider the procreation or the normative or what we
have to do to stop procreation. We consider the
what life is.
Yeah, so, uh, uh, let's start by focusing here
a little bit on the Western tradition and philosophy.
Uh, LET'S talk about anti-atalism in ancient Greece. I
mean, do you think that at least in the
Western tradition it represents the oldest anti-Natalist manifestations and
How did the Greeks back then approach matters of
birth, life, death, and existence?
First reply, yes, if we consider the Western tradition,
and so I think that the Greeks' philosophy maybe
is one of the most oldest, at least in
Europe, and but because they were aware. Of the
tragedy of life and I also asked for the
question about life, meaning. I will say that in
the Greek philosophy and there is a kind of
A perception of what does it's life and what
does it's death and but it was a perception
far from the modern way to consider life. I
mean it was a kind of ontocentric I would
say position because they consider always life in relation
to the general meaning of the word, the general.
Meaning of the nature, so they consider life as
well as the death natural way. I mean it's
natural that we come into the world. It's natural
that we passed away. We call this birth. We
call this the end death, and I mean they
were they were quite. Aware of the suffering, they
were quite aware of the tragedy of sank into
the world, but they accept it because it was
in a general, um, from a user perspective, it
was kind of um. I don't want to say
normal, but yeah, they accept because they don't consider
the life from their inner side perspective. Life is
something that it's natural. It's the natural presence of
something. And that has no real meaning. So and
also what is interesting, as I said, Sino's reply
was a kind of story which was common between
the population. So does it mean that It was
a kind of paradigm. The people, the people, as
I said, to the cultural atmosphere was quite aware
of the suffering and of the situation of human
beings.
I mean, we're focusing on philosophy, but I guess
that this sort of uh topics, issues related to
human existence, life, death, suffering, and so on also
er manifested in their own uh fiction. I mean
the, the Greek poets also wrote about this sort
of topics even though perhaps some later philosophers like.
Plato, I mean, he was not really fond of
the poets. I mean, he preferred Socrates and the
philosophers, but I mean it, the these are topics
regarding human life that have manifested in Greece, not
only in terms of its philosophy but also its
fiction, right.
Yeah, yeah, uh, if you're talking about the, uh,
for example, the poets like the tragedy of Sophocles
or, uh, yeah, of course, and I, I included
them into the philosophical position because, um, yeah, in
part because now I'm studying Nietzsche and Nietzsche considered
the Greek and studies all these kind of um
atmosphere, Greek atmosphere from this philosophical perspective. And uh
also because the tragedy and er I mean they
they were way to represent a piece of life.
I mean so they are not, it's a kind
of, I'm not sure it's a fiction. I think
that it's a way to er to represent life,
yeah.
Mhm. Yeah, I mean definitely Nietzsche's The Birth of
Tragedy is a very uh interesting book about that
period of Greek history and the, the poets and
so on and uh what he would call the
Dionysians and and things like that. So, uh, do
you think that there's any first anti-atalist philosopher that
we can identify?
Uh, NO, no, because of the reason I told
you, I mean, uh, it was a kind of
a different paradigm, so it was a kind of
general awareness of the tragedy of life and of
the. Yeah, all, all the implication of, uh, to
be into the world, so, mm, no, I, I,
I prefer speak about a kind of uh a
different paradigm, a different uh perception which was general.
Mhm. Uh, WITH Aristotle, of course, now we're going,
uh, we're uh going forward a little bit, was
Aristotle an antenatalist?
Uh, NO, no, uh, because I was thinking that
there was a passage where I spoke about Aristotle
in the book, but no, uh, because the passage
I was thinking it the same myth between Midas
and Sius, but it was, it must be comprehended
in the role of the soul. So it was
the young Aristotle who was in the Plato Academia.
So no, I think no.
Uh, HOW about, uh, again in the Western tradition,
how about Christianity? I mean, is a Christian antenatalism
possible, keeping in mind that Christianity, I mean, at
least as it is today and as it seems
to me has been throughout most of its history,
seems like a doctrine that supports pro-natalism par excellence.
Yeah, your question gives me the possibility to clarify
my position because I spoke about the Christian 188
in my book. But I try to, uh, I
mean, I discussed to feel the zero position on
the Christian perception. I mean on the possibility to
interpret some Christian, the Old and the New Testament
in an anti atheistist way, but, and I find
his interpretation quite interesting, but I think that we
must. We must comprehend, we must understand the meaning
of the Christian religion in its reality. I mean,
and from this perspective, I would say that of
course there is no any anti-natalism in the Christian
religion, but because the meaning and of this religion,
it's quite different from the anti-natalist position, of course.
I think that. Uh, I think that the De
Giro interpretation were quite, uh, some of that, um,
uh, yeah, were quite, uh, uh, interesting, and they
can open to new reflection, but in general I,
I would prefer to say that it's only an
interesting interpretation. I mean, I'm not sure to, um,
to say that there is a, yeah, to say
that there is a Christian 1880s, but because we
have to distinguish. I mean, it's a. A kind
of faith and he speaks it speaks about the
afterlife and there are a kind of meaning about
the quality of life that I mean I think
that it's easier to say that Christian cannot be
an at least.
So you don't think then there's there that there's
anything in the Bible that could be interpreted as
explicitly antenatalist.
Uh Maybe, maybe the coelle, uh, but maybe only
yeah the coelle or some passage between the other.
Book, but yeah, if I have to to consider
the book of Coelle Ecclesiastes in Italian, it's Cole.
I'm not sure it's the same in the international
world and yeah maybe it can be considered an
ancient at least because there are also some references
on the. On the on the affirmation that it
would have been better not to be born, but
apart from that, and I'm I mean, we can,
as I said, we can interpret some of this
passage in an antiist way, but I'm not sure
that it's our own interpretation. I mean,
yeah, yeah, fair enough, and I mean, of course,
for this kind of question. Uh, WE have to
rely on the New Testament and the collection of,
uh, books that they have there, but was Jesus
in any way an anti-Natalist, or do you think
he could have been an antenatalist?
Uh, NO, I'll say no. I mean, yeah, I
always have in mind all the interesting, uh, the
book of the few de Giro, and I will
say, oh yes, there are many pastors, but I
have to consider my perception, and my perception is
that, uh, no, because the meaning, the aim of
the Bible and the new Old Testament is another
one and it's not against life.
Yeah, uh, what sort of manifestations of antenatalism can
we find in eastern religion or philosophy?
Well, I like that you speak about manifestation because
I would say that we have many manifestations, but
they are manifestations of antenatalism. So again, we can
consider it quite similar to the anti-natalist perspective, but
the meaning, the aim of this manifestation is quite
quite different from. From our position because for example
I don't know we can speak about the dukka
which is the contents of the first through in
the Buddhism and it's quite similar. We start from
the reality of suffering, but then there is a
way according to them to overcome this and we
have the 8th path, but the aim is not
to stop procreation but to stop the The cycle
of rebirth, so we can, yeah, they negate birth,
but is our coming into the world. I mean
it's not against procreation, and there was also a
kind of distinction in the level of the society
and in the lower level there is they must
procreate so. There is a kind of uh it's
another kind of structure or if we consider that
they they don't have the the kind of asceticism,
I mean asceticism is not for not procreate, it's
for to stop desire to join a kind of
detachment from the reality. It's quite different from the
ancient ageism. Position, but I think that we can
find, we can, yeah, there are kind of similarity,
of course it's quite meaningful that we have the
same starting point because it means that. I mean
there was a quiet awareness of the suffering of
the world. Then we start from the same ground.
Then they found another way to solve, to figure
it out.
I mean, uh this is just my opinion, but
I guess that in at least an indirect way,
er, if you fully commit to the Buddhist position
of trying to overcome as much as you can
your own desires, then at least indirectly it could
lead you to anti-natalism because if you're trying to
overcome your desires, one of them is to have
sex, so. I mean, I, I don't know what
you think about that, so.
Yes, but I think that you stop to have
sex and then you stop for physical reasons to
have to have children. I mean, you not stop
sex for not having children. You stop sex for
for not feeling the desire. That means that create
a kind of relation. So I'm not sure. It
can be considered a kind of anti-natalism. I'm not
sure to reply to your question in the right
way.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, yes, so
I agree with you. It's probably not an anti-natalist
position because it doesn't come from the argument or
the premise. Is that you shouldn't reproduce because it's
bad to reproduce. It's just that you end up
not reproducing because as a consequence of overcoming your
desire, so it's not the same thing, right? Yeah,
and also because
I think uh if I cannot, I also think
that uh um. I mean, as I said, we
start from the same position of the suffering of
the world, but for the ancientists we can stop
only by not reproducing. For them, the solution is
a detachment from the reality. It's different. There is
a is a way, is a different way to
stay into the world, I would say.
No, yeah, I, I agree with you. So, uh,
in the more modern, uh, period, what manifestations of
antenatalism can we find and perhaps let's start by
comparing, uh, ancient forms of antenatalism with the ones
that we saw in the 19th and the 20th
centuries.
Mm I would say that in the modern age
we don't have the antenatist some antenatalist manifestations. I
mean we can find in Leibniz Pascal some argument
that can be a kind of Premise for the
anti-natalism. I was thinking about the divertissement, that is
kind of the mechanism of the funds, but I
think that what happened in the modern age was
The affirmation of the anthropocentric paradigm because there was
the trust that man can can know the nature,
can control it, and by controlling it, it can
be he can be able to join the happiness
and the idealism was the The top of this
anthropocentric perception and distrust on men and on the
possibility of man to to say to the world,
to control the world, and in fact, after the
I mean in the same time of the idealism
we have the pessimistic perspective in Germany. And I
don't like to, I don't like pessimistic, but this
is the way in which the group of philosopher
of the second half of the 19th century were
considered. So just to be clear. And that represents
a kind of coming back to the first position,
the coming back to the suffer for the world,
the way the world it is, and so I
don't speak about the teenageism in the modern age.
In the second half of the 19th century, but
because we come back to some perception of the
Greek philosophy of the past philosophy, and I think
that if we have to speak about modern anti-naism,
maybe it starts with Yeah, it starts at the
end of the 19th century, so it's uh Kurning
and za, uh, but, yeah, and then it's a
kind of proto-1atalism also because the, uh, it remains
a kind of metaphysical frame for the argument of
being born. I mean it's not the, it's still
not the argument in the Benatarian way I would
say.
Do you think that there's anything in the philosophy
of someone like Schopenhauer that we could link to
anti-natalism?
Yes and no, because I think that there are
many features that can be considered like anti at
list, some quotations that can be interpreted in an
anti at list, and first of all, I mean
Schopenhauer speaks about the will to live and the
suffer that the will is for men, OK, but
In the first page of the word as Will
and representation, um he uh he gives us, he
gave us a kind of uh advice when we
have to read his book, we have to consider
his book as um as a system, as a
unique book, and if we have to follow this
method, I would say that uh. Not an anti-theism
because we can only try to follow the will
to live and in my opinion, the way in
which we can stop the abolition of the power
of the will, it's a way. That is different
from the anti-natalist behavior. It's a kind of the
ascetic position, the role of the art, the role
of the compassion, but there are some passages in
which Schopenhauer himself assessed that. It's we cannot murder
the child, and we can only follow the nature.
I mean, we cannot stop recreation in this sense.
Uh, HOW about Hartmann? You also mentioned in your,
in your book, I mean, uh, is there anything
in his philosophy that you would consider antenatalist?
Uh. Yes, if we consider the results, because we
have this evolution from the unconscious to the conscious
reality and this movement brings to the end, which
is the end of the world and the end
of the human being, and so we can maybe
consider that there is this kind of movement which
is divided in different ways and at the end
we join these results. But I'm not so, I
mean, yeah, maybe we can consider a kind of
anti-natalist because the result is that we stop with
human beings, but I think that it's a kind
of anti-natalism that we should comprehend in the idealistic
position of of Arman. I mean it's a kind
of the movement that the words. That the world
goes to do apart from the human being. The
unconscious or the conscious is not the conscious or
unconscious of the human being. It's a general movement
of the world. So I'm not sure it's an
antenatalism in the way that we decide to not
have children because we understand and.
So in modernity, in modern times, who would you
say is the first full-fledged anti-atalist? I mean, who
was the first philosopher that in his or her
philosophy was explicitly making anti-atalist arguments?
Uh, I would say maybe the Pseudonym Koning, but
I, I only, um, I mean, I don't want
to tell more about him because I studied only
the beautiful works of Karima Karma and so for
the philosopher that I I know better. I would
say better vessels up for me. It's a kind
of turning point and between the previous previous form
of anti-natalism and the contemporary way because the passage
of the last. It's quite interesting. We have the
the assessment that you must, you don't stop, you
have to stop procreate and leave the earth free
from the presence of man. So I would say
maybe better vessels up.
OK, so, uh, tell us more about him, about,
uh, Peter Wessels Za. I mean, how important is
he in the history of anti-Nalism and, uh, what
were his main ideas and contributions to the topic?
It's a philosopher that I appreciate in a particular
way. I like the, I like his philosophy and
the way he he discusses and he studies man
because it's a kind of biological perspective, so it's
something where we, uh, we, he, I mean, in
my opinion, he has not a kind of inner
side of the. He studies human beings as all
the other animals, and we discovered that life is
not so beautiful as we believed, and I think
that one of the main roles is the role
of the consciousness and the identity between consciousness and
harm, which is something I mean it's not new,
but in the last Messiah it's quite clear that
the Consciousness, it's one of the main reasons of
suffering for human beings and it's also a kind
of metaphysical position in which man is considered as
part of the nature, but it's a nature that
refuses presence and all the story. In my perspective,
it represents, um, I spoke before as a kind
of starting point, as a turning point because. In
my opinion, it represents the moment in which we
can find both the previous form of anti-natalism and
the contemporary form of antenatalism because we have on
the one hand the metaphysical perspective, so the description
of the human being, this descriptive descriptive. Awareness of
the words and on the other hand we have
the ethical reply stop, don't reproduce, don't be fruitful
and so in this way I think that he
can be considered a kind of key moment in
the past between the old and the contemporary anti-ism.
Uh, I mean this is just, uh, an aside,
this is just a joke, but since you're Italian
and at a certain point you said there that,
uh, I mean in Zapfas, I mean he sort
of got into how life is not beautiful, I
guess that probably you're not very fond of Roberto
Benini's Lavitabella.
And it's a movie that I don't like, but
I suppose that I'm one of the few people
in Italy who doesn't, don't appreciate this, uh, this
movie, so, uh,
I, I mean, he won an Oscar with it,
so I guess that's why Italian people also love
him, so, right.
Yeah, and also for, yeah, I mean for many,
many reasons, but uh I don't like.
OK, so, uh, let's get into the theoretical aspects
of anti-atalism. We already talked a little bit about
them, uh, but, oh, OK, so earlier we talked
about, you mentioned the asymmetry argument, we talked about
the risk argument. What do you think are the
strongest arguments in favor of anti-natalism?
As we said before, I think that the risk
argument is one of the strongest arguments. We are
speaking against anti-natalism
in favor, in favor of in
favor the risk argument, in my opinion, is one
of the strongest arguments. To deal with an innateism
because we are not, I mean I think that
it's the the more formal. We don't speak about
suffering, we don't judge, we don't make evaluation, but
we only say that we expose someone else to
the risk of coming into the world and all
the all the things that we have discussed before
and also the The quality of life argument, it's
a kind of argument that I appreciate. It's maybe
the most simple and because uh I mean we
have only see the life and see all the
uh the difficulty that we have in our life
every day, but I think that it's quite strong
maybe for this reason and uh yeah, the other.
Uh, uh, I mean, uh, they are interesting, but
I'm not sure that they are really, really strong.
For example, the asymmetry argument or the constant arguments,
they are quite interesting, but I'm not sure they
are so strong.
Oh, OK, so let's tackle those two arguments in
turn. So what do you make of David Bennettar's
symmetry argument?
Uh, WELL, I like this argument and also I
like the, uh, I mean I find it interesting
because um uh Benatar was able to, um, to
put together two different um hypotheses, uh, hypothesis maybe
in English, uh, one in which X exists and
the other in which this Xs does not exist
and uh from this. To compare this to possible
reality, we can say that existence is not better
than non-existence and at the same time that maybe
non-existence, it will be preferable. So I I appreciate
the main idea, but I think that. In the
asymmetry argument, there is something, I mean, I'm not
sure about the premise 3 and 4, and which
are the premise where we discuss about the non-existent
being because in my opinion we are discussing this
premise regards always the living being. So maybe yeah,
maybe it's only an argument that it's quite interesting,
but. I'm not sure that we are comparing these
two situations. We are comparing all the life which
already exists, so maybe the quality of life argument
is stronger and more useful and Less subject to
all the criticism that the asymmetry argument uh uh
uh yeah, there were many different, many, many people
who criticize this argument for the role of the
premise, so maybe other arguments are better.
Yeah, before you tell us a little bit more
about the quality of life argument, let me just
say that I, I'm quite fond of David Benatar's
philosophy, but when it comes to anti-natalism specifically, I
think I said this in my interview with Amanda
Sukernik for her podcast, uh, the Exploring Anti-atalism podcast.
I mean, I said that. Over time I moved,
I've been moving away from some of his anti-atalist
arguments, specifically the asymmetry argument, because the, the bit
about the non-existent being, I mean for me is
not really quite convincing, and I think that particular.
FOR people who are not anti-natalists and you're trying
to uh argue in favor of anti-natalism, I mean,
it's a very weird argument for most people because
they, it's very hard for them to understand why
you would be talking about someone who would never
exist,
right? Yeah, and also if we, but I come
back to Plato, I mean maybe also not Plato,
but if we consider the non-existent and I mean
the judgment we do are, as I said, in
my opinion, are judgment that regards the existent being
because if we speak with non-existent. It's like we
cannot, we can say anything about them. We can
only evaluate life as it is and to establish
from the our position of living me that maybe
not being born, it will be better, but because
something already exists, I mean. Uh, YEAH, it's something,
uh, it's an argument that I find quite strong
if we want to compare because it's clear, but
there are also for me, uh, there are many,
um, there is something that must be clarified.
Mhm. And what is then the quality of life
argument and what do you think about it?
I think that it's, as I said, it's one
of the strongest arguments and also one of the
maybe the easiest arguments, but because I mean we
can create a list of all possible reasons of
suffering and we can consider the suffering that we
received, the suffering that we create for other human
beings. I mean it's maybe one of the Argument
that requires less less um you know, less dialectic,
so we don't have to speak enough about it
because it's clear and it's interesting that to come
back to Bernaar, the asymmetry. Argument is one of
the most argued, criticized. The quality of life is
not so criticized, so maybe it's quite clear from
itself that life is contents, all this bad stuff
maybe.
Mhm. And what do you make of the argument
from consent? I mean, do you think that there
is a convincing argument and as a philosopher, what
do you think about it?
Uh, I think that I understand the argument and
the reason of the argument, but I disagree with
it. It's one of the positions that I found,
uh, uh, I mean for me there is no
sense in this argument because, uh, I understand that
the role of the consent, anyone can decide from
uh for him, for his or her coming into
the world, but I mean it's impossible to ask
to other people the consent also in the. If
we, if we read in the encyclopedia the voice
for consent, we have the A actor and a
B actor, and I mean there is a living
being and also we have all the other possible
situations he must be aware and he must be.
In healthy to take decisions, so I think that
with the unborn it's impossible to have this kind
of people who are able to give you a
consent to is coming. I think that in the
book I spoke about a kind of. Gap between
the first and the third person. I mean, as
I said, we cannot decide for someone else because
even if our decision seems quite good and we,
we have the best. You know, the best we
can do the best for our kids, we cannot
know the life he's going to to to live,
and we cannot decide for him because maybe for
us it's easy to solve some problem, but for
him it's a reason of suffer and so I
mean we cannot decide for others. There is a
huge gap between our life and that of the
others. We can try to do our our best,
but it remains his or her own life.
Yes, uh, I also think that I, I mean,
because I also bring to the table how people
commonly react to these kinds of arguments, not just
about how philosophers think about them, because I mean
in terms of philosophy, yes, we can understand those
arguments, but we also have to admit that some
of them are very abstract arguments like the argument
of consent. I mean because. For most people, if
you expose them to that argument, they might say
yeah right I mean you people don't consent to
becoming uh to uh coming into existence, but why
does that matter? I mean what can we do
with that? There's no one there yet to consent,
so for most people that argument doesn't really make
sense, you know,
yeah, and. I mean, I have to confess they
agree with this perception because there is anyone and
of course it's a decision. I mean, maybe it's
better to say, OK, it's a decision that we
take for someone who still does not. Exist and
we decide considering our life it's preferable in because
of course there is anyone and also in the
first year a kid, a young a child is
not able to give consent is not aware of
the life and all the implication of life.
Yeah, so I was going to ask you how
much objective suffering do you think there is in
human life? I mean, earlier, we've already talked a
little bit about uh objectivity and subjectivity when evaluating
uh the good and bad aspects of life. So
do you think that it is possible to approach
this question objectively in some way or only subjectively?
Uh. I would say maybe that we can we
can speak about objectivity if we consider some intrinsic
aspect of suffering of life. So for example, I
mean, as I said, we cannot establish the same,
we don't suffer for the same reason, but we
can say that maybe there are some intrinsic. Um,
REASON of suffering, the hunger, for example, is one
of them. The, uh, I don't know, the, the
war maybe, but I, I, no, the war, I
would prefer to speak about some. Biological aspect, something
that is related to the way we are in
the world, so maybe the consciousness for a human
being or Maybe also the awareness of this, why
not, even if we, as I said, we should
distinguish between the process of dying and the act,
but that of course it's something that makes people
feel uh troubled with the idea and that they
are going to die and they are going to
not stay into the world uh I mean they
stay into the world for a short time and
a limited time.
Mhm. Yeah, uh, actually, I mean, I think that,
uh, the, uh, as I said earlier, I mentioned
that I over time I distanced myself from some
of the arguments that David Benatar makes and when
he evaluates or he tries to evaluate the amount
of suffering that people objectively. Experience in their lives,
I mean, I don't really agree with him a
lot because I think that, uh, different people, I
mean, even if you don't want to consider, for
example, people resorting to religion or some other belief
system to give meaning to their suffering, there's, it's
still the case that. Different people have different personality
traits and because of the life experiences they are
exposed to, they might develop psychologically in different ways
and they don't evaluate uh similar life events, uh,
the, the same. I mean, uh, people have might
evaluate. THE same life event, two different people, one
might evaluate it as good or positive, the other
one might evaluate it as bad or negative. So
I don't, I think it's not really that easy
to talk about, um, objectively evaluating uh the good
and bad aspects of life.
Yeah, I agree, as I said also because the
same, the same reason can be for me a
huge pain for you. It's something that doesn't matter.
So I mean we cannot actually I like the
Venators least, but because I mean it's quite clear
for people we can, it's a way to say
there are so many reasons, of course we don't.
Feel the same the same features in the same
way, but it's a way to say the reason
for suffer and are so I mean are enough
and each person has its own reason to to.
So don't feel confident with life, maybe we can
say this.
Yeah, do you think of death as a harm,
or do you think that death is always a
harm?
If we definitely consider the final act, I will
say that it's not an arm in my opinion.
I think that. The death that that causes pain,
harm is the death as a process of dying.
So the awareness that, as I said before, each
day we lost something and we lost, we always
live the death of other people, and I think
that this is more painful than our death. So
in this way I would say. That it depends.
It depends on the way we want to consider
death.
Yeah, uh, I think that, I mean, in my
opinion or in my perspective, I think that it
is especially, you shouldn't consider that a harm. If
the person who wishes to die is suffering a
lot, I mean, I think that there are lives
out there that are so horrible, so terrible that
particularly if the person who is experiencing it wishes
that wants that death is actually something good in
those particular cases.
Yeah, I think that it's good, but uh and
it's also the topic of my bachelor's degree thesis,
as I said, so, but I'm considering maybe disease
and so the kind of end of life question
like euthanasia, assisted suicide. Yeah, of course death is,
I mean it's a way to solve the problem.
It's not something bad because, but in that case
I also say that. Maybe I quite radical, so
I, I don't, I, I speak about my perception
and the way I see the situation, but I
think that for people who suffer in that way,
their life is already finished. I mean, what uh
what remains remains the biological life, but it's not
the biograph bio biography, the life that we do
that one. That we live every day and that
we experience and that we enjoy in every day,
it's something that maybe it's not life anymore. We
cannot consider life as the fact that we breathe,
but so in that way I would say that
death becomes of course preferable. It's not an army,
it's a way to solve the problem of life.
Yeah, uh, what do you think are the ethical
questions surrounding parenthood that anti-atalism uh raises?
Uh, uh, uh, um, uh, MAYBE, uh. Yeah, maybe
I would say the the fact that they act
in a selfish way. I think that it's one
of the the first argument because it's also the
more it's one of the arguments that parents and
people don't consider when we speak about the the
the fact of bringing someone else into the world.
So I think that this is one of the
maybe one of the most difficult. But also one
of the most evident, we have to speak about
the fact that they decide, but they decide taking
into account their own position, their own perception, their
desire, and so maybe I would say that one.
And I also consider, but I know that it's
not so common, but sometimes it's happened that the
parents sometimes are not able to stay with the
with the children until they become adults, and this
is also a problem because we cannot. And they
are not sure to be able to say or
to say, even if they say, but to say
in the right way because sometimes there are many
problems in the relation and all these problems are,
in my opinion, something that we should take into
account when we speak about the relation between parents
and children. And first of all, the fact that
Even if I don't want to speak about the
consent, it remains a fact that they decide for
someone else and this person cannot decide for for
himself or herself about the life, so it remains
an asymmetry, of course.
Yes, and I, I mean, I think that um
actually all arguments, but at least most arguments used
by people to justify reproduction and to justify being
parents are not really. Very convincing because it's like
oh it's a biological impulse. OK, but we've already
went through, we've already gone through that, so that's
not a very good argument. Oh, it's because everyone
does it. I mean that's also not a very
good argument and. And uh another that I find
really selfish is, oh, because when I get old,
I want to have someone to take care of
me. Uh, OK, yeah, I can, I can understand
that, but it, it sounds very selfish because if
you think about it deeply, you're creating Creating a
new being, just thinking about yourself, just focusing on
your own future suffering, and you're putting him or
her through the huge risk of dealing with lots
of suffering in their own life just to take
care of you.
And you must not be sure because you don't
know what's happened with your kids. Maybe they they
die for some reason, they live in another country,
they are not available to stay with you until
you're uh you became older and older. I mean
there are so many evaluations on the future that
uh that we cannot establish before.
Yeah, uh, so what responsibilities do you think parents
have to their children because they brought to the
world new beings, new sentient beings, new human beings
particularly. I mean, what kinds of responsibilities do parents
have after they've done that?
Uh, I think that uh uh once they have
created a new, uh, a new living being, I
mean maybe of course for sentient beings it's quite
different because most of the parents after the generation
leave the uh the animal alone, so I mean
we can speak only about human beings in this
sense and I think that um yeah, the education,
the presence or the to be present to be
um. To try to give them the Best life,
but while I, I mean, I'm assessing it and
I'm saying about what, oh, so I'm not sure
about the reply I'm giving, but because I think
that they have many responsibility and but at the
same time. The only responsibilities that uh uh. I
mean it's what I want to say is that
it's, it cannot, we can maybe we cannot speak
about responsibility because if even if they do something
and they do their best for give to his
or her child the best future and the best
life. We cannot know, as we said before, so
I think that yeah, the responsibility is maybe to
be present and to to prevent to prevent from
from harm, from pain, but it's a kind of
abstract reply because as we said they are not
sure to be able to do it.
Yeah, and I think it's, there's a very important
point for us to make here, particularly for people
who will be watching our conversation who are not
anti-natalists because there's many misconceptions out there about anti-atalism
that people make, and one of them is they
think that because we are against reproduction or we
think that reproduction is immoral, that we are, we
are anti. Children, but that's not the case because
the children that already exist, they should be taken
care of, right? And for example, some, someone might
not reproduce, but if they want to become a
stepparent to take care of an orphan, that's perfect.
I mean that that's not just ethical, but it's
moral to do that, right? I mean to take
care of people who already exist, particularly children who
are vulnerable,
right? Yeah, yeah, this is, uh, this is true,
of course, the anti-natalism does not mean that we
should stop the life of the child, the children
who already exist, and uh, but I think that
is the responsibility, um, the responsibility or the normal
responsibility that each party. And not only the parents,
each person must have to the other, and sometimes
maybe it's not to take care of everyone, but
there is a kind of attention to the needs,
to the what she yeah, to the life she's
going to to to live, but yeah, of course
1880 it's. Uh, IT'S so, I mean, he wants
to stop procreation, try to explain the reason, but,
uh, uh, it, uh, uh, it does not entail
with the life of the already living being, of
course.
Yeah, but, but would you say, uh, or do
you think antenatalists should say explicitly that becoming a
parent is immoral?
Uh, YES, for the reason we discussed, I would
say, um, yes, uh, but, uh, yeah, I think
yes.
Mhm. Um, uh, LET, let me, uh, ask you
about other related, uh, things. I think, I mean,
things that we can relate to antenatalism but are
not directly anti-natalist. So how does antenatalism approach assisted
fertilization?
Uh, REPEAT.
How does antenatalism approach assisted fertilization?
Uh, OK, I would say that, uh, as for
the fertilization, uh, it depends on what uh what
we want to describe with fertilization because when I
consider this topic in my book, I consider, I
started from a particular novel and the engineering. On
the DNA and I think that many people consider
that if we were able to modify this engineering
the DNA we can build up a living being,
a new human being which will be able to
not to suffer, and I think that also in
this way it represents a selfish way to. Build
up the child, the new human beings in the
way you are. The novel I have in mind
is Ishiguro's novel Clara and the Sun, and there
there was a particular history and in which you
can, you can see, you can read, you can
understand the selfish reason behind parenthood. So the also
the. This kind of DNA engineering show and confirms
the egoistic way because we can we decide how
he must appear and what quality and I mean
I think it's only a confirmation of the. Traveling
of parenthood,
yeah, uh, and how about suicide? I mean earlier
we talked about death and whether it is always
a harm or not, and, and I think that
we both agree that sometimes it's not, it's not
only not a harm, but it's also a good
thing to die, at least in some situations, but
uh suicide specifically, do you think that anti-atalism has
something to say about it ethically?
Yes, I would say that we should discuss about
suicide because I mean if we are saying that
it would have been better not to be into
the world, not to come into the world, then
it's normal to say, OK, if we If we
should not have been into the war, then we
should go away. We should commit suicide and so
I think that 1880s should deal with this topic,
and I think that the reply. The possible reply
are two because on the one hand, of course
we cannot compare the not procreation with the suicide
because in the middle there is the life, the
life that we have that we try to to
build up in the best way we can, and
on the other side I'll say that starting from
the idea that not to be into the world,
it would be preferable. Maybe we cannot judge in
a negative way the suicide. I mean suicide remains
a possibility, an act that men can commit, can
decide to do, and I think that the people
who decide to do to commit this this big
way to die because you must go against your
life. It's quite, it must be respect because it
means that the reason for which you prefer to
die, they must be, even enough that you prefer
to stop your life. So this is what I
would say.
Mhm. Uh, WHAT do you think are the strongest
arguments against anti-natalism? I mean, what do you think
are the arguments that when you are exposed to
them against anti-natalism are the hardest to tackle?
Uh, I can distinguish because if I consider the
reply that other people maybe told me when we
when I was in some conversation, I would say
that most of them say that they refuse the
role of suffering or they refuse to consider suffering
as a main reason as we say it and
also the. That procreation is something that we cannot
control because it's nature or that life is beautiful,
and but from the metaphy perspective now. I'm considering
some of these topics, for example, the role of
the necessity, and because one of the features of
the Greek philosophy, and in my opinion there is
a metaphysical perspective there is that. They have to
accept the role of the necessity of Ananke, so
they cannot decide to stop procreation. They must accept
that the world is in this way. So maybe
my question is that from this perspective, anti-atalism is
still possible. I mean we can be quite aware
of the suffering or all the stuff as the
Greek philosophy. And or the poets and but why
we don't stop, I mean maybe there are some
other concept forces that we should consider and forces
that of course depends that are independent from us
so that we cannot control and apart from all
I would say that. It's strange maybe as a
reply, but I would say that life itself is
an argument against the 1980s because if we consider
the life of people, they find they establish meaning,
they have some aim, and the mechanisms to defend.
So maybe there are many reasons for which is
life itself that is in a um which is
not able to see the er the the meaning
of anti-natalism to the meaning of life, the reality
of life I would say.
Mhm. Do you think that anti-atalism is a humanist
philosophy?
If a human we intend to hit concerns with
human beings, I would say yes. I would prefer
to speak about philanthropy, and, but if you say
it's for humanistic, we consider the fact that it
wants to defend in some way human beings. I
would say that it's not humanistic because of course
it's he he don't want to er to find
a way to keep human beings into life. It's
a way to say that human beings and human
life is something wrong.
Mhm. Uh, WHAT do you think about extinctionism? Because
many times people associate antenatalism to extinctionism. I mean,
uh, are you also a proponent of that and
do you think that antenatalism goes hand in hand
with extinctionism or do you, uh, break them apart?
I would say that um I'm not a proponent
of anti-natalism, but because anyone is a proponent of
anti-natalism because of the fact that of. Extinctionism, uh,
I'm not a proponent of extinctionism and that any
people is a proponent of extinctionism, but because extinction
is a fact, it's something that will happen in
the future. We don't know when, but it will
go up, so I think that uh we can,
we can, yeah, we can agree, we can disagree,
but it's going to happen, and this is my
perception. So what I try to discuss and to.
Uh, TO, to see, to, to write, to think
is that we should maybe only renovate this factual
truth that we are going to extinct, and I
think that ancient, maybe it moves in this direction
because we should consider that we are going to
pass away as a species and. Not because we
are bad, we are not able to stay into
the world, but because every other living beings and
every other beings we are going to pass and
new living beings may come into the world, and
but I think that it's true. It's I mean
how to say the the modern philosopher, it's a
matter of fact. It's it's something real evident.
Yeah, I, I mean, I agree. I think that
it's just inevitable even if we as humans through
our own actions do not lead ourselves to our
own extinction. I mean, whether by I mean, er,
altering the environment in ways that we are no
longer able to survive, or through nuclear war, or
through, I don't know, super intelligent AI or something
like that. I mean, even if we don't do
that to ourselves just from a biological perspective. If
it's inevitable that we will evolve into other species
eventually, so humans at a certain point will no
longer exist as humans, at least, or I mean
from a physics standpoint, there's lots of evidence that
somewhere in the future, even if it is. Trillions
of years, trillions of years in the future, there
will be a time will arrive where the universe
can no longer sustain life. And so I mean
it doesn't matter what kind of perspective you take,
we're just going to go extinct somewhere in the
future, right?
Yeah, yeah, and also I was also thinking that
life was not present from the beginning, so I
mean it seems that we, we, I mean it's
not the right term, but we wait until the
conditions were good for the life and. Of course
in the future the conditions may be changed, but
not because man is responsible for the climate change
and all the the fight are all arguments interesting,
but I think that before all this trouble it
happens because it's in the natural evolution of the
world. I also consider that now there are some
transhumanistic positions that consider that we will be able
to. To overcome the problem of death, yeah, maybe,
but then what we, I think that the result
will be something which is not human anymore. So
also in this way it's a kind of extinction
of human beings in the way in the way
we are now.
Yeah, you know, and I mean this is just
my position, but I'm very skeptical when it comes
to transhumanism that claim about us being able to
live forever. I mean, I think that there are
clear biological limits, and, and I mean, and the
forever beat, I mean, Even if you become a
transhuman again, there will arrive a time in the
future where the universe will no longer be able
to sustain life in whatever form. So I mean
you won't be there forever anyway, so. Yeah, so
let me just ask you one final question. How
do you think we should approach people when telling
them about anti-natalism, people who are not anti-Nalists themselves,
people who perhaps haven't even heard about anti-natalism before.
Mhm. What's uh I had my professor at the
beginning of my when I started to study this
topic, I tried to convince people and my professor
one time told me you don't have to convince
anyone. You, you, what you can do is only
to try to explain the reason of the 1880s,
try to be the more clear you can and
to. You know, you you find argument to explain,
to say why the anti-atism is a philosophical perspective
and it's a respectable perspective. Then because this depends
on me, then the people can decide to accept
it, to criticize, but I don't have to convince
anyone, and I think it's true. It's something that
Now I'm learning to do. I think that we
can only try to be clear, try to justify
the reason of our position, and I mean the
reasons are evident, but maybe we have to explain
it and then I think that there are people
who may will be interested and studies and and
maybe they agree with anti-natalists and people who probably
prefer other positions as for every perspective, philosophical perspective,
but I would say every perspective in general, so
that one maybe.
Yeah, great. So, uh, let me just tell the
audience that the book is again Ail Nachereke Nonchiboleva
Story Theoria de Antinatalismmo. Uh, AS I said, my
translation, my personal translation is it's the birth we
didn't want history and theory of antenatalism. I will
be leaving a link to it in the description
of the interview, and Sarah, uh, apart from the
book, uh, are there any places on the internet
where people can find you and your work?
Uh, I have the, uh, personal website, uh, in
the, uh, maybe I can share with you the
link and uh on reserved gate and on the,
yeah, my personal page with the university.
Yeah. Uh, GREAT. So, uh, I mean, uh, just
before we finish, let me just say that this
is one of my favorite books of 2025. Uh,
uh, uh, BY the end of the year, I,
uh, since 2021, I've been doing posts every, every
year with my favorite nonfiction books of the year,
and this one. It is going to be up
there for sure. And I mean it, I mean,
it's in Italian. Come on guys, learn Italian to
read this book. If you ever wanted an excuse
or a reason to learn Italian, this is a
good enough reason. Also, there's the book by Doctor
Alberto Cervi that I'm going to interview just this
week. As well, techno panico, and uh that it's
an excellent book. We have to read Italian because
I'm going to put up two Italian books on
my list this year and you don't, if you
don't, uh, if you can't read Italian, you can't
read them. Come on, just go and learn Italians.
And Sarah, thank you, thank you so much for
coming on the show. It's been a, a great
conversation.
Thank you. Thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloane Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Puntervan Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgius Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannaertner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.